Welcome back.
This week we'll be looking at adjectives.
Adjectives modify nouns and pronouns.
That is to say, let's they clarify, describe, delimit, expand, and qualify words they agree with.
Attributive adjectives can be placed before or after the word they modify.
In English,attributive adjectives typically come before the noun-but not always.
Let's have a look at some examples: in 'the part-time teacher' or the 'happy goblin', 'part-time'
and 'happy' are attributive adjectives that come before the noun; in 'proof positive'
or 'the body corporate', 'positive', and 'corporate' are attributive adjectives
that come after the nouns that they are modifying.
Predicative adjectives come after linking verbs, such as the verbs 'to be', 'to
become', 'to seem', or to 'appear'. They function as complements that qualify
the subject of a sentence. They are, as their name suggests, in the predicate of the sentence.
Were I to say 'the goblin seemed 'happy' or 'the teacher was 'part time', 'happy'
and 'part time' are predicative adjectives, preceded by the linking verbs 'seemed'
and 'was'.
Adjectives exist to answer questions. If you are facing challenges, someone might ask you
which challenges? New challenges. What kind of challenges? Challenges of the insurmountable
variety.
Further examples are words like 'perfect', 'important', 'hot', and 'absent'
in these examples.
Participles and infinitives sometimes function as adjectives. Consider the sentence 'The
delighted children and the smirking gruffalo could not decide which ice-cream flavours
to choose', where 'delighted' (a past participle), 'smirking' (a present participle), and 'to choose' (an infinitive)
are adjectives.
Adjectives can be marked to indicate a degree. This means that they can take a positive,
comparative, or superlative form.
Let's look at the sentence 'She is bright', in which 'bright' is a positive form.
'Bright' is a quality, and, of course, an adjective, but one that can take on varying
degrees. 'She is brighter than he is,' employs the adjective 'brighter', allowing
for a degree of comparison. In the sentence, 'She is the brightest student', we use
the word 'brightest' in the superlative degree. The comparative form is often made
by adding 'er' to the root word; the superlative is made by adding 'est'.
Here are some common examples of adjectives and their various degrees of comparison. Some
words take irregular forms in the comparative and superlative, such as 'good', 'better',
and 'best'.
Here is a list of adjectives, marked to indicate degrees, which take an irregular form when
doing so. As you can see, 'more' denotes a comparative degree, and 'most' denotes a superlative.
Some adjectives cannot be marked to indicate a degree, such as eternal, fatal, impossible,
maximum, minimum, perfect, unique, entire, and infinite. Something cannot be 'more
perfect' or 'more eternal', so we refer to them as 'absolute adjectives.'
While sometimes necessary, adjectives are often over used. Isaac Asimov railed against
what he termed 'fatty adjectival froth': adjectives, which, while they may enrich the
text, don't contribute to the meaning of a sentence. Adjectives leave less to the imagination.
Take the sentence, 'The sun went down over the sea'. No adjectival description is necessary.
While a writer could write half a page about the sun, the sea, their interpersonal relationship,
the light blinking off the crests of waves, the gleaming aureole of the last light, and
the aurous luminescence of the foam, their reader already knows about the sun and the
sea. They can imagine the scene for themselves, and will only be tired by too much further
description. Mark Twain addressed adjectives as follows:
I notice that you use plain, simple language, short words and brief sentences.
That is the way to write English--it is the modern way and the best way.
Stick to it; don't let fluff and flowers  and verbosity creep in. When you catch an adjective, kill it.
No, I don't mean utterly, but kill most of them--then the rest will be valuable.
They weaken when they are close together. They give strength when they are wide apart.
An adjective habit, or a wordy, diffuse, flowery habit, once fastened upon a person,
is as hard to get rid of as any other vice.
When using adjectives, avoid cliches. Snow-capped mountains, fathomless depths, crystal waters,
deep, dark woods, and azure skies are lazy, hackneyed expressions. It is best to let nouns
and verbs speak for themselves, and to use adjectives actively-with serious consideration-rather
than by default. Rather than 'the old lady', say 'the crone'; instead of 'the large,
impressive building' say 'the edifice'. As useful as adjectives are, they should be
used sparingly, and with purpose.
James has more on adjectives for you in the second lecture of this week.