Welcome back.
Now we're going to talk about Adverbs.
Adverbs answer questions like when, where, how, how much, how often, in what manner,
and to what degree.
They are often formed by adding '-ly' to certain adjectives, but can take other forms, such
as here, now, often, such, well, and almost.
Adverbs appear frequently in speech and writing, because they can modify verbs, adjectives,
prepositions, conjunctions, phrases, clauses, and also other adverbs.
In the sentence 'I studied feverishly', the adverb 'feverishly' modifies the verb 'studied'.
In 'What a wonderfully scrumptious meal!', 'wonderfully' modifies 'scrumptious', an adjective.
In 'The birds flew right over the lake', 'right', another adverb, modifies 'over', a preposition.
And in the sentence 'I arrived just after it started', the adverb 'just' modifies the
subordinating conjunction 'after'.
Let's look at some more examples.
The entire phrase 'To the brink of madness' is modified
by the adverb 'practically'.
Similarly, the clause 'You forgot to check your references'
is modified by the adverb 'apparently'.
Finally, in the sentence 'He speaks exceedingly well',
the adverb 'exceedingly' modifies the adverb 'well'.
Like adjectives, adverbs in English can be 'marked' to indicate degree.
Some fit a standard form, such as 'soon, sooner, and soonest',
while others take an irregular form, as in 'badly, worse, and worst'.
Some adverbs cannot be marked to indicate degree, in the sense that something can't
be found more or less universally, or come more or less first.
Adverbs that cannot be marked include now and then, first or finally,
eternally, singly, or rarely.
Words like quite, very, rather, extremely, and too are called intensifiers, and while
they don't act upon the actual meaning of a clause, they do emotionally enhance the
words that they modify.
All intensifiers are adverbs.
The position of adverbs can completely alter the meaning of a sentence.
For example, take the sentence 'I have eyes only for you'.
the adverb 'only' modifies the phrase 'for you'.
I am saying that I have eyes for you alone, darling, and no one else.
Likewise, where the adverb 'nearly' modifies the verb 'lost', understand that we still
have our camping equipment.
But where 'nearly' modifies 'all', we lost a substantial amount
of camping equipment - nearly all of it.
Like adjectives, adverbs also conform to a Royal Order when it comes to arranging them
in sequence.
Adverbs are arranged in order of manner, place, frequency, time, and purpose.
Consider the sentence: 'I meditate blissfully in my garden every afternoon at 4pm to find
inner peace'.
Blissfully is the manner in which I meditate, my garden is where I meditate,
every afternoon is how frequently I meditate, at 4PM is when I meditate, and finding inner
peace is the purpose for which I meditate.
You should be careful when using adverbs, as they are well known for their ability to
weaken writing.
Whenever a word is modified, its meaning is altered.
Sometimes this is useful, but other times, an adverb, or series
of adverbs, will rob a word of its power, clutter the text, and add superfluous information.
Stephen King had this to say about adverbs in his book On Writing, a Memoir of the Craft.
I believe the road to hell is paved with adverbs, and I will shout it from the rooftops.
To put it another way, they’re like dandelions.
If you have one on your lawn, it looks pretty and unique.
If you fail to root it out, however, you find five the next day . . . fifty the day after
that . . . and then, my brothers and sisters, your lawn
is totally, completely, and profligately covered with dandelions.
By then you see them for the weeds they really are, but by then it’s - GASP!! - too
late.
To reiterate, adverbs (if not used deliberately and sparingly) clutter the page with uselessness,
stifle the imagination, and get in the way of otherwise strong words.
For example, the sentences 'Daria walked lazily to the bus
stop' and 'Jane ate her pizza messily and quickly', are boring and verbose owing to
the adverbs 'lazily', 'messily', and 'quickly'.
If we then described how Daria walks or how Jane eats using stronger verbs, we end up
with 'Daria slouched' or 'Daria lumbered to the bus stop', and 'Jane guzzled' or 'Jane
ingurgitated her pizza'.
One final piece of advice is this: avoid weasel words.
Adverbs like actually, generally, apparently, basically, and essentially... are weasel words.
One potential prime minister of Australia was rumoured to have lost an election because
every time he spoke to a journalist he prefaced his remarks with 'Speaking frankly', which
sabotaged his message.
So, basically, you should actually, generally use weasel words very carefully.
As you can see, when poorly used, these words are vague, ambiguous, and unnecessary.