A sentence is a collection of words that is grammatically complete by itself and usually
expresses a complete idea. It typically contains both a subject and a predicate. In written
English, a sentence starts with a capital letter and ends with a period or full stop.
A predicate MUST contain a finite verb that relates to, or 'agrees with', the subject.
A finite verb is a verb that belongs to a subject and shows tense: I did my homework.
Sometimes the subject role is implied or 'understood': Do your homework.
An infinite verb (infinitive) is made up of the marker 'to' and the main part of the
verb. I love to read.
Without a finite verb, a sentence is called a sentence fragment. For example, the dilemma
that Hamlet expresses in his soliloquy
'To be, or not to be' is a sentence fragment because it has a verb (used twice, in fact)
that is not finite ('to be' is an infinitive). However, 'That is the question' is a complete
sentence because 'is' is a finite verb.
We can classify sentences by function (the work that they do in a sentence) and by form
(their structure or their arrangement of words)
The four functions are: Statement The cat sat on that mat.
Question: Did the cat sit on that mat? Command: Sit on that mat, cat!
Exclamation: Wow! Look at that cat!
We need to digress for a moment to explain the term 'clause'. A clause, like a simple
sentence, is a string of words that has a subject (even if it is understood) and a predicate
that includes a finite verb.
An independent (main, principal) clause can stand alone as a sentence.
For example: I love reading. A dependent (subordinate) clause does not
make sense on its own. For example: Because I love reading . . .
Clauses can combine to create compound, complex, and compound-complex sentences.
We have highlighted clauses in the sentences below about Sherlock Holmes. The orange components
are independent or main clauses. The blue ones are dependent clauses.
There are four main sentence forms:
A simple is made up of one independent clause
Sherlock Holmes waited.
A compound sentence is made up of two or more independent clauses joined by either a semicolon
or a coordinating conjunction such as for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so. When a comma
is used in front of one of these conjunctions to introduce an independent clause, these
conjunctions are called by the mnemonic the COMMA FANBOYS.
Sherlock Holmes waited; however, Watson delayed his visit.
Sherlock Holmes waited, and [he] was missed at Lloyd's registers.
A complex sentence is made up of one dependent clause subordinated to one independent clause,
either at the beginning (Left-branching), in the middle (mid-branching), or at the end
(right-branching).
While Watson moved the lamp, Sherlock Holmes waited. (Left Branching)
Sherlock Holmes, though he was anxious to have his dinner, waited. (Mid Branching)
Sherlock Holmes waited, while Watson moved the lamp. (Right Branching)
A compound-complex is made up of a second independent clause added to a complex sentence,
or a dependant clause added to a compound sentence
While Watson moved the lamp, Sherlock Holmes waited, and [he] was missed at Lloyd's registers.
Sherlock Holmes waited, and [he] was missed at Lloyd's registers, because he was a good
customer.
In a wonderful book by Stanley Fish, How to write a sentence and how to read one, he asks:
'How does every component in a sentence function to contribute to/to extend/to maintain
the ensemble of relationships?'
Fish advises writing students to practise composing sentences and then explain what
you have done.
Following this lecture, you will find a collection of 'chunks' of texts that you can use
to construct complete, coherent sentences using the core sentence Sherlock Holmes waited.
There are no right or wrong answers to this activity and you will be surprised to know
how many sentences are possible in this exercise.
Yet another way to categorise sentences is into loose and periodic forms.
A loose sentence positions the important information at the beginning.
Plain language reforms have become law in many countries because law makers believe
that citizens should have access to documents they can understand.
Can you see why this is a loose sentence?
A periodic sentence, on the other hand, positions the important information at the END.
Because law makers believe that citizens should have access to documents they can understand,
plain language reforms have become law in many countries.
Can you see why this is a periodic sentence?
To conclude this section, here's a table to introduce subjects, predicates, and objects,
which we'll cover next week when we look at verbs.